okay so let's
continue with our discussion about
continuous functions
no pun intended
first let me recall a few facts
well um is not a definition but this was
a theorem we proved last time so i won't
recall the definition of continuity but
we proved this theorem characterizing
continuity
and if we have a
subset of r
an element in s
and a function
s going
f going from s to r
then f is
continuous at c
if and only if for every sequence
x sub n
of elements of s
such that x n converges to c
we have
limit as n goes to infinity
of x of n equals
f of c
so this was a theorem we proved last
time
and let me recall an older theorem which
i said was
very powerful but never really gave you
any sort of
powerful application
which will
start giving some powerful applications
now but this was the bolzano
virustras theorem
which states that every bounded sequence
of real numbers has
a convergent subsequence
okay
and we're going to use these two
theorems today
and in the next lecture
[Applause]
to prove that a continuous function on a
closed and bounded interval is very well
behaved so
so
what we're going to show
let's call it the theme
is that
so
if f
from a closed and bounded interval is
continuous meaning
it's continuous at every point
then
it is
well behaved and for example the first
thing that we're going to prove
will be a combination of two theorems is
that
the image
of a closed and bounded interval
by a continuous function is
another closed and bounded interval
okay and e could equal d so this could
just be a single point for example if f
is a constant function then the image
would just be a single point
okay
so this is uh
this is the theme of this lecture in the
next lecture
and uh so let's start uh
basically um we're gonna prove two
theorems one is called the min max
theorem
and the other is called
bolzano's intermediate value theorem the
min max theorem will tell you that
f of an interval is always contained in
an interval of this type
then the intermediate value theorem will
tell you everything in between
uh
two certain bounds is attained by f so
let's start off with um
showing that
f of a closed and bounded interval is a
bounded set so let me just recall what
it means for a function to be bounded
we say that a function from a subset s
to r
is bounded so here s is a subset of r
is bounded if
there exists a non-negative b such that
for all x
and s
f of x is bigger than or equal to b
okay
so for example uh
if i take f of x
to be
3x plus 1
and here
s is
closed and bounded interval 0 1
then f is bounded
so
pictorially what does this mean well
f of x equals 3x plus 1. so at 1 it's
going to be
and pictorially a function is bounded if
the graph is always bounded between
two real numbers okay
and for us for f x it's always bounded
between 0 and 4 in terms of this
absolute value
so f of x
equals
3x plus 1
this is less than or equal to by the
triangle inequality three times the
absolute value of x plus one
x is between zero and one so its
absolute values bounded by one
okay
so this function is bounded
and
so how about a function which is
not bounded what does that mean
remember whenever we
see a definition we should try to negate
it to understand it better so f
is unbounded
if
for all b bigger than or equal to 0
there exists some bad x
such that f x an absolute value
is bigger than or equal to b
okay
so
you know if a bounded function is
supposed to have a graph bounded between
two uh real numbers an unbounded one is
one in which
at least part of the graph is
kind of
going off to plus infinity or minus
infinity so kind of
most basic example
we could think of is let's say if we
wanted to go from
0 1 to r again we could take
f of x to be
well
0 at x equals 0
1 over x if x is
not equal to zero
okay
so this function looks like
one
and
goes up to infinity as you approach x
equals zero so why is this unbounded we
have to verify the negation of the
definition
so i claim f is
unbounded
let b be bigger than or equal to zero we
now have to find an x
in zero one so that one over x
or so that f of x is bigger than b
and this is uh
this is pretty easy so
let x be an r
such that
one over x is bigger than
b
okay
um so if b is equal to 0 we take x to be
anything in 0 1 that's
fair enough
ie
x len
1 over b so
if we'd like we could make this explicit
so well i'll just keep it here
and so now if we take x
here
and look at the graph it's going to be
bigger than b
and that's it
okay
okay so
several of these proofs will have the
same flavor
of what we're going to try and
prove
and this uh this one is a nice one to
start off with and necessary so
my first
theorem that i want to prove
um about continuous functions on a
bounded interval
closed and bounded interval is that
they're bounded
so
if i have a function from a b to r
is continuous
meaning it's continuous at every point
in a b then
f is bounded okay
so the proof of this theorem
um
and uh
several of these theorems will be uh by
contradiction
okay
and
um the fact that we're on a closed and
bounded interval
is
or that we're in the setting is what
allows us to use
virus straws this is powerful too
so
this is uh
so assume
and
so like i said this proof is
by contradiction
that the conclusion is false
okay
which uh the precise meaning is right
here right for all b there exists an x
and s such that that so
for every b i can find an x and s so
that the absolute value of f of x is
bigger than or equal to b
okay so i could take b
uh
i could take b to be in for example
where n is a natural number
then
we're all in a natural number
so i'm taking b to be in there exists
x of n in
a b
such that
f of x
sub n an absolute value
is bigger than or equal to n okay
so now i have the sequence which is
bounded because it's in this
closed and bounded interval
and
xn is
bounded because it's in this closing
bound on interval a b
so
by
bolzano virustras
there exists a subsequence
x n sub k
of the sequence x sub n
and x
and r
such that
the limit as k goes to infinity
of x of n sub k
equals x
okay
now i claim that this x is actually in
the interval a b
since x of n sub k is a
subsequence of x sub n which are in a
sub b
or a comma b
so i have for all k
x of n sub k is between a and b
this implies by what we know about
limits that limits respect inequalities
right
and therefore a
is less than or equal to
limit
as k goes to infinity of x of n sub k
which is
less than or equal to b and
this is x so
ie
x is between a and b
okay
another way instead of going through
this is
i believe we did in the assignment that
an interval of this form is closed
right
and
you prove that for a closed set
so when i say interval of this form is
closed i mean it's a closed set and you
proved on the assignment that for a
closed set
if i have a convergent sequence then the
limit of that sequence has to belong to
the set so this is
um
you know really a consequence of the
fact that this interval is a closed set
okay so i have this subsequence
[Applause]
x of n sub k
it's converging to x which is in a b
and i know the function i haven't used
anything about f yet
and i'm assuming it's continuous so
let's look at
f of x
since f is continuous
and the x
sub n sub k is converged to x
as k goes to infinity i know by the
theorem uh
up top over there
that
f of x equals the limit of f of x sub
x sub n sub k
and therefore
the absolute value of x
is equal to the limit as k goes to
infinity of the absolute values
but now f of x sub n is always bigger
than or equal to n right that's how the
x events were chosen we assumed that f
is unbounded
and therefore all of these x sub n's and
a b were chosen so that f of x of n is
bigger than or equal to n so this is
bigger than or equal to
so
so each of these
is bigger than or equal to
n sub k
let's see how to write this without
okay so we'll write it this way
i don't want to write the limit of
something equals infinity because we
haven't said what it means for the limit
of something something to equal infinity
um
okay so then
the limit as k goes to infinity of f of
x sub n sub k
exists
which implies that the sequence
is
bounded
right
a convergent sequence is always bounded
and since n sub k is always less than or
equal to f of
x of k
and this is a bounded sequence this
tells me that the sequence
n sub k
is bounded but this is uh impossible
remember to form a subsequence the n sub
k's are increasing integers
right
which is a contradiction and this is
always because n sub 1 is always less
than n sub 2 is less than n 3 and so on
so these are always getting bigger
without bound
all right and therefore
we have our contradiction
okay so again here's the structure of
the proof
we have uh we want to
you know assume some property of f
um
so we assume not we get this
kind of bad sequence of numbers in this
interval
um
and using bolzano virusdrost we get to
pass to some sort of limit x
and
you know the continuity of f at x
essentially breaks
the badness of the sequence x event
okay and we'll we'll see another
argument where
it's kind of the same same flavor
so
um
soon state that f always achieves uh
kind of a maximum value and minimum
value so let me first on the closed and
bounded intervals so let me precisely
define what these absolute mins and
absolute maxes
are select f
be a function from s to r s is a
non-empty subset of r
we say
f achieves
an absolute max
let me write it this way
absolute min at c
and s if
uh f of c sits below f of x for all x
and s all right
if
for all x and s
f c is less than or equal to f of x
okay so this is a
absolute min
f
achieves
absolute max
at d and s
if f of d sits above everything
every x you stick into f if
for all
x and s
f of x is less than or equal to f of d
okay
so for example so what's the picture
that goes with this
let's imagine we're on a closed and
bounded interval um
then
d so f achieves absolute max at d
the graph of f sits below
the value f of d
and
sits above the value f of c
okay
now absolute max and mins at points are
so that the function
uh is always sitting above f evaluated
at that point
just a
quick warning
let's say we're looking at
all right so this is not to scale but
let's say our function looks like this
okay
so this is 1
3 halves
okay
then this function does not have an
absolute max
does not achieve an absolute max or
achieve an absolute min
on uh the set one two okay
what you would like to say is that one
that
f achieves an absolute min at one but
the graph does not sit above f evaluated
at 1. okay
just like over here the graph of f does
not sit below f evaluated at 2 okay so
absolute f achieves an absolute min at a
point if
the whole graph sits above f evaluated
at that point not necessarily uh some
number sits below the whole uh graph
that's what boundedness means
okay
so i just want to
clarify that distinction between you
know the graph of a function being
bounded below by a number and f
achieving
a min at a certain point so for example
the graph of this function is bounded
below by one
but f does not achieve an absolute min
at
c equals one
okay
okay so
um
our next theorem is the min max theorem
for
continuous functions which is the
following
let f be a function from a b to r
if f is
continuous meaning
it's continuous at every point in a b
then f
achieves
absolute min
and absolute max
on a b
okay so another way of uh
stating this
so let's just make this a mark
that says that there exists c d
and a b
such that f
of a b is contained in
f of c
f of d
okay
all right so we'll do
the proof of
an absolute max and
uh the proof for the absolute min i'll
leave to you
it's a simple
kind of change in the argument that's
that's not too difficult
and again we're going to use this
powerful tool bolzano virus truss that
allows us to go from kind of an
arbitrary sequence
in a b
to a convergent subsequence so
equals f from a to b
let me write it this way if
if this function is continuous
then by what we've proven uh
where
over there
this implies
f is bounded
then
the set
e
given by
the range of f so f of x where x is in
a b
this set is bounded above right if the
absolute value of f of x is always less
than or equal to some b then f x is
always bounded above by b for all x and
a b so this set is bounded above
all right
now
let l
be the supremum of e which exists
because the real numbers have the least
upper bound property whenever we have a
non-empty subset which is bounded above
we can always find a
supremum now since l is the supremum of
this set
we did this i think in an assignment
yes i definitely did an assignment
then
there exists
a sequence
of elements of this set e
converging to l
right
and to express that that means there
exists some sequence of elements so
there exists a sequence of the form f of
x sub n
such that
limit as n goes to infinity of f of x
sub n equals l
all right
now
we would like to show that l is equal to
f of
d for some number d
okay
um and how we're gonna do that is
well this is
the x of n's are just some uh sequence
in a b so we can pass to a subsequence
which converges to some number call it d
and then we need to show that f of d
equals l and that's where we use
continuity and then that's the whole
proof
right
um which you know we saw a little bit
over here we passed a subsequence and
then we get to say that the
limit of this subsequence has
kind of the same property as the
original sequence
so by
alzheimer's straws
there exists
a subsequence
x of n sub k so this is a subsequence of
the sequence x sub n
and
as before same argument
you know and
limit d but
as before d will be in the set a b
[Applause]
such that
limit as k goes to infinity
of x of n sub k
equals d
okay so we use bolzano virus straws to
pass through the subsequence of the x of
n's
and
a convergent subsequence and
so
all of these x of n sub k's are between
a and b so their limit d will be between
a and b
but now
since f is
continuous
at d it's continuous at every point in a
b so it's certainly continuous at d f of
d
this is equal to
the limit as k goes to infinity
of f of x of n sub k since the x events
of k's are converging to d
and now f of x of n sub k this is also a
subsequence of the sequence f of x sub n
and f of x of n is a convergence
sequence so any subsequence has to
converge to the same thing
since f of x sub n converges to l
and
f of n
sub k
k
is a subsequence
of f of x sub n
and
remember what was l l was the super v
and therefore for all x and a b f of x
is less than or equal to f of d
which means f
achieves
an absolute max
at d
and the absolute min is similar
and i'll leave it to you
okay
all right so just re-running through the
proof um
you know we did use the fact that uh
a continuous function is bounded
and we extracted the soup if you like of
the range of
f and
so which is
you know by this exercise we did in one
of the assignments means that this
supremum is equal to the limit of f of x
of n's
we would like to show l is equal to f of
d for some d
so we passed a subsequence of the x of
n's that does converge to something
in the interval a b and we can show
using the continuity of f
and
how this original sequence
was chosen
that f at that point is actually equal
to the supremum of that set
and therefore f achieves an absolute max
of that set
as beginning students of math
one of the things we should be curious
about is
you know what hypotheses are needed and
what what are not in uh
you know the statements of theorems
so
our main hypotheses we so we had two
hypotheses really um
in
the theorem that
f is going from this closed and bounded
interval to r and that f is continuous
so what happens if we drop
one of those hypotheses is the
conclusion still true that f achieves an
absolute max and absolute min
so this example that i drew right here
shows that we need to have uh the
function be continuous in order for it
to achieve an absolute max an absolute
min
on the closed and bounded interval
but uh
it also needs to be on a closed and
bounded interval so
uh so we have some continuous function
from s to r
can we
drop
the assumption that s is equal to this
closed and bounded interval meaning uh
could it be say an open interval does
the same conclusion hold
i.e let's say f is from an open interval
and the answer is no
a simple example is if i take the
function f of x equals
for example 1 over x
minus 1 over
1 minus x
okay and
on
the open interval 0 1 so what does this
guy look like
here's 0
let me draw
dotted line there here's one
and the graph shoots up to
positive infinity as you approach zero
and as you approach uh one
so where does it equal zero i guess it
um
there's one half
okay so this function does not achieve a
mat absolute min or absolute max
but it is continuous on this uh interval
but because the interval's not closed
and bounded uh this function does not
achieve an absolute min and an absolute
max so what i'm what i'm trying to say
is that the assumptions that
two so there's two assumptions here that
we're working on a closed and bounded
interval and that f is continuous these
two assumptions are necessary for the
theorem to be true
okay now they are not the most precise
way of stating this theorem
you could replace a closed and bounded
interval
uh with what's called a compact set
which maybe i'll put in the assignment
or on the midterm
depending on
where there's room
but just uh
you know in the setting of intervals
the interval has to be closed and
bounded and the function has to be
continuous for
this theorem to hold true okay so that's
what uh what i wanted to get at
um
so what we've proven
as i said in this remark here
[Applause]
is that um
there exists two numbers c and d in a b
so that f of a b is contained in f c
f d
c would be where f achieves in absolute
min
d would be where f 2 achieves an
absolute max okay
and this is
absolute max
so now the question becomes
um do i hit everything in between all
right does this uh
inclusion
become equality
and you know i i gave the game away at
the beginning of the lecture by saying
yes it will but uh you know that's
actually a theorem
so
this was the min max theorem
which
i didn't call it that i should have it's
actually called that in the notes but
now we're going to move on to the
intermediate value theorem
and first we're going to do what looks
like a special case and
then we'll prove the general case
so this theorem
which i'm actually
it's not called this
in the textbook but i'm going to call it
this
which i'll call the bisection method
is the following
let f be
function from a b to r
if
f of a is less than zero
and so
one more
be continuous so we're always in the
continuous setting for this
section
so if
f of a is less than
zero and
if a b is bigger than 0
then
there exists
c in the interval a b
such that
f c equals zero
okay so the picture that goes on with
goes along with this is here's a
b
here's f of a
f of b is positive
and therefore if it's continuous and you
believe
the definition of a continuity is uh
the fact that is that i don't have to
pick up my
piece of chalk it pains me to say this
but
that's again not the official definition
but one you keep in your head since
somebody probably told you that at some
point if i don't have to pick up my
piece of chalk then eventually i have to
cross
the x-axis and therefore
at this point c f of c will be zero
okay now why do i call this theorem the
bisection method as we'll see
the way you determine this c
is by
what in calculus books call the
bisection method
all right
okay so
for the proof
but we're going to define a sequence of
numbers a and uh
and b in with special properties so i'm
first going to tell you what a1 and b1
are a1 is just going to be a
b1 is going to be b
okay
and
so now i'm gonna tell you how to choose
the next element in the sequence
knowing the see the element in the
sequence before
okay so we're gonna
first to find two sequences a n
and b in
so let me tell you how to do that
and the way we're going to choose this
is so that f of a sub n is always less
than 0 and f of b sub n is always bigger
than or equal to zero all right
and
they're obtained from the previous uh
two guys by taking the midpoint so
bisecting
uh the ones before so
um
to get this started a1 will be just a
b1 will be b
okay
now for
in a natural number we're going to
define
so we know a1 so now i'm going to tell
you how to define a2
based on now you know a1 but
what i'm about to write down will also
tell you how to define a3 since you now
know how to do a 2 so i'm going to write
it this way for in a natural number
knowing
a sub n b sub n
we define
a sub n plus 1
and b sub n plus 1
as follows
so
if
f of
a sub n plus b sub n so the midpoint
between
the two guys that i already know so
if you like um
take n to be one for for when you first
read
how to define a sub 2 say
but what i'm writing down applies to
every n
so we take f of a sub n plus b sub n
over 2 to b
if this is bigger than or equal to 0
then we define a sub n plus 1 to be a
sub
n
and
b sub
n plus 1 to be
the midpoint
and if of the midpoint
is less than zero
then
a sub n plus one is going to be the
midpoint
and
b sub n plus one will be the previous
point okay so let me um in fact
so this is how you define the sequence
in general let's let's walk through what
this means just for n equals two
okay
so that you see you get the idea
maybe i should have done this first
so let's uh let's draw a picture to go
um
in fact i don't need
this axis i'll just
b so and this is a sub 1
this is b sub 1 right and then we look
at the midpoint
okay
all right
so we know that f of
a sub 1 is less than
f of b sub 1 is bigger than 0
which is certainly bigger than or equal
to 0 if it's bigger than 0. now we look
at the midpoint
and based on
the sign of this guy
will be how we define a2 and b2 so for
the sake of me going through this let's
suppose that uh
f of
this thing is uh
less than zero okay
then i take
a2 will be a1 plus b1 over two
and
b2 will be b1 and now i look at the
midpoint of these two guys so now i'm at
this stage
f of a2 is less than zero
if b2 is bigger than zero so i'm in the
picture before except now i'm at half
the distance between the two end points
yeah
and so i look at this
point now
a two plus b two
over two
and i look at the sign of that and let's
suppose f of this thing is bigger than
or equal to zero
okay
then i will take
this point to be
a
three
and this point will now be
b3 okay and what i have is f of a3
is less than zero f of b3
is bigger than or equal to zero
okay
so the point is is that the left
endpoint is always negative when i stick
it into f
the right endpoint is always
non-negative when i stick it into f
okay and that the distance between the
two midpoints is always getting cut in
half by the previous distance before
okay
but we're always in the the picture but
um
kind of in the setting we were in the
step before
right
okay
now
we have three properties of the sequence
of ans and bns okay
so for all n they're always bounded
between the original two
endpoints
not only that
uh the ace of n's are always moving to
the right remember a sub
uh
n is always getting replaced by the
midpoint between a
and uh a sub n and b sub n
okay possibly or it's staying the same
so a sub n is always less than or equal
to
a sub n plus one
okay
so in fact
let me write it this way
we always have a sub n is less than or
equal to b sub n we always have a is
less than or equal to
a n plus 1 which is less than or equal
to a
in
and then we also
[Music]
have so for all n
b
all right i'm making a mess of what i'm
writing down so let's let's start this
over
so the first property i want to
for all in natural numbers we have
b
a sub n is always less than or equal to
a sub n plus one
right
and
b sub n plus one remember we're whenever
if we're going to change b it's always
to change it to the midpoint between the
previous guy
and the a from the previous step so this
is always less than or equal to b submit
okay
and now
two
if i look at
the difference
this is always equal to
half of the previous distance right
because either
one of these are getting changed to the
midpoint so if it's a sub n plus one
then
b sub n plus one minus a sub n plus one
is b sub n minus a sub n plus b sub n
over two which gives me this
okay
three
draw in a natural number
and this is just based on how
we are choosing we are doing this
construction f of a sub n is less than
zero
and f of b sub n
is bigger than or equal to zero
okay so i hope this clear i hope this is
clear
[Applause]
you know all of these if you like you
could prove by um induction all right
for n equals 1 this is certainly true
um
assume it holds for n equals m and then
prove all of these statements
here for uh n equals n plus 1.
um
okay but i'm i'm just
stating it as clear from the
construction and hopefully it is
okay
so
what does this give us
well
by one
the sequence is a sub n
and b sub n
are
bounded because they're always bounded
between a and b
monotone sequences
right a sub n is increasing b sub n is
decreasing
all right
thus
there exists uh
limits
so
i'm going to call them c and d but it
has nothing to do with the the c and d
from over here that's their
thus
these
sequences
converge
i.e there exists
element c and d and a b
such that
the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub
n equals c
again the a sub n's and b sub n's are
between a and b so their limits will
also be between a and b
b sub n
equals d
okay
now i claim c equals d why should this
not come as a surprise well the ans and
b ends are getting very close they're
always you know the distance between any
two of them is always getting halved
right
now
a sub n minus b sub n this equals a sub
n minus 1 minus b sub n minus 2
over 2 which equals
1 over 2
squared
a sub n minus 2 minus b sub n minus 2
dot dot and therefore this equals 1
over 2 n minus 1
b sub 1 minus a sub 1
equals 1 over 2 to the n minus 1
b minus a
okay
and therefore
c minus d which is equal to the limit as
n goes to infinity
of a sub n minus b sub n
equals the limit
as n goes to infinity
of 1 over 2 to the n minus 1
b minus a
1 over 2 to the n minus 1 is converging
to 0 times this fixed number b minus a
equals 0. and therefore these two
numbers these two limits c and d equal
each other
okay
so this step here is
by the second property here
and now we're essentially done
[Applause]
using the third property
by three
and continuity
if i look at f of c
since uh
the a sub n's are converging to c this
is equal to
and f of a sub n is always less than
zero so its limit is less than or equal
to zero
and
now remember c is also equal to the
limit of the b sub n's
and therefore
by continuity f of c
is equal to f of b sub n and the f of b
sub n's are always non-negative so their
limit is al also bigger than or equal to
0. so i've shown that this number f c is
all is less than or equal to zero and
then it's also bigger than or equal to
zero and therefore
f of c equals zero
okay
so
we use the
why i put the bisection method here is
because we used a bisection method to
prove this theorem which looks like a
kind of a special case
of um
of a certain intermediate value property
meaning
that
i can always find something
that if i have
that
i can always find something in the
interval that achieves something in
between f of a and f b in this case it's
just 0 but i can in fact upgrade this
this is the following theorem due
to bolzano
so
bolzano's intermediate value theorem
let f from a to b
r
be continuous
if
y is between f b
so meaning let's say so we're in one of
two cases let's say f of a is less than
f of b
uh if y is between uh f of a and f of b
um
then
there exists a c
and a b
such that
f c equals y
if
f of a is say bigger than f of b and we
take something in between
the same conclusion holds
all right so in short if i take anything
between the value of the function that
evaluated at the two endpoints a and b
then
the function achieves
that value at some point
okay
so
so if i take any y between here
f has to cross this
horizontal line and it's achieved at
some point
c
okay
and we'll deduce this from
uh
so this you know
looks like a special case of this
intermediate value theorem if f of a is
uh
you know less than zero f of b is bigger
than zero and y is equal to zero but in
fact you can reduce this general
statement to that special case
just by
a simple trick
so proof
suppose f of a
is less than f b so we're in this first
case
and y is in
f of a
f b
that's g of x
b f of x
minus y
okay this is not a function of x and y y
is a fixed number between f of a and f b
and this is a function going from a to b
to r
and
which is continuous
okay
so sum of two continuous functions is
continuous f is a continuous function by
assumption
this is just a constant minus y so their
sum is also continuous
but now if we look at
g of a this is equal to f of a minus y
now y is bigger than f of a since y is
an f of a f b so this is less than 0
and g of b is equal to f of b minus y is
bigger than zero
and therefore
by the previous theorem
there exists a c
in a b
such that
g of c equals 0
which means
i e f c equals y
okay
and uh the proof assuming
f of a is bigger than f of b is similar
you just
now put y here minus f of x or you put
now you define g of x to be y minus f of
x okay
so let me just make a remark about that
is similar
look at g of x
equals y minus
uh f of x
all right
so
bolzano's intermediate value theorem
tells us
that
if i take
any value between the function evaluated
at the two endpoints then that value is
achieved
by something
in between a and b
and therefore this
will in fact
give us that f of a b is equal to f c f
of d for some c and d
right so this is a simple theorem from
from this
continuous
if
local
and let's see
not local
absolutely
absolute minute c and absolute max
at d
then
the image of f
the image by f of a b is equal to
f of c
f of d
okay
and what's the proof well
apply
balzano's intermediate value theorem
to
f now going from
the possibly smaller interval cd it
could be dc or cd
depending on if
the thing that i have to stick into f to
get
the min and the thing i have to stick
into f to get the max is smaller than
the other
so apply the
bolzano's intermediate value theorem to
this function now just restricted to the
smaller closed interval it's still
continuous
and that's the proof
all right
so maybe i was a little too fast with
that so um
let me let me just say a couple of more
words about this
um
so
this tells me that
uh
everything between the two values f c
and f d is achieved by f
uh on this interval
but this is a possibly smaller interval
than a b
so
this is contained in the range of f now
of f of this larger interval
and since we already know that f of a b
is contained in
f of c f of d
and now we've proven the reverse
inclusion
this implies that f of c
f d
equals
f of a b
and that's the proof
okay
so i think we'll stop there next time
we'll
finish with a few remarks about
kind of an application of the
intermediate value theorem
and then we'll move on to uniform
continuity